[spacy_languages]
udpipe_af = spacy_udpipe:UDPipeLanguage
udpipe_ar = spacy_udpipe:UDPipeLanguage
udpipe_be = spacy_udpipe:UDPipeLanguage
udpipe_bg = spacy_udpipe:UDPipeLanguage
udpipe_ca = spacy_udpipe:UDPipeLanguage
udpipe_coptic = spacy_udpipe:UDPipeLanguage
udpipe_cs = spacy_udpipe:UDPipeLanguage
udpipe_cu = spacy_udpipe:UDPipeLanguage
udpipe_da = spacy_udpipe:UDPipeLanguage
udpipe_de = spacy_udpipe:UDPipeLanguage
udpipe_el = spacy_udpipe:UDPipeLanguage
udpipe_en = spacy_udpipe:UDPipeLanguage
udpipe_es = spacy_udpipe:UDPipeLanguage
udpipe_et = spacy_udpipe:UDPipeLanguage
udpipe_eu = spacy_udpipe:UDPipeLanguage
udpipe_fa = spacy_udpipe:UDPipeLanguage
udpipe_fi = spacy_udpipe:UDPipeLanguage
udpipe_fr = spacy_udpipe:UDPipeLanguage
udpipe_fro = spacy_udpipe:UDPipeLanguage
udpipe_ga = spacy_udpipe:UDPipeLanguage
udpipe_gd = spacy_udpipe:UDPipeLanguage
udpipe_gl = spacy_udpipe:UDPipeLanguage
udpipe_got = spacy_udpipe:UDPipeLanguage
udpipe_grc = spacy_udpipe:UDPipeLanguage
udpipe_he = spacy_udpipe:UDPipeLanguage
udpipe_hi = spacy_udpipe:UDPipeLanguage
udpipe_hr = spacy_udpipe:UDPipeLanguage
udpipe_hu = spacy_udpipe:UDPipeLanguage
udpipe_hy = spacy_udpipe:UDPipeLanguage
udpipe_id = spacy_udpipe:UDPipeLanguage
udpipe_it = spacy_udpipe:UDPipeLanguage
udpipe_ja = spacy_udpipe:UDPipeLanguage
udpipe_ko = spacy_udpipe:UDPipeLanguage
udpipe_la = spacy_udpipe:UDPipeLanguage
udpipe_lt = spacy_udpipe:UDPipeLanguage
udpipe_lv = spacy_udpipe:UDPipeLanguage
udpipe_lzh = spacy_udpipe:UDPipeLanguage
udpipe_mr = spacy_udpipe:UDPipeLanguage
udpipe_mt = spacy_udpipe:UDPipeLanguage
udpipe_nb = spacy_udpipe:UDPipeLanguage
udpipe_nl = spacy_udpipe:UDPipeLanguage
udpipe_nn = spacy_udpipe:UDPipeLanguage
udpipe_orv = spacy_udpipe:UDPipeLanguage
udpipe_pl = spacy_udpipe:UDPipeLanguage
udpipe_pt = spacy_udpipe:UDPipeLanguage
udpipe_ro = spacy_udpipe:UDPipeLanguage
udpipe_ru = spacy_udpipe:UDPipeLanguage
udpipe_se = spacy_udpipe:UDPipeLanguage
udpipe_sk = spacy_udpipe:UDPipeLanguage
udpipe_sl = spacy_udpipe:UDPipeLanguage
udpipe_sr = spacy_udpipe:UDPipeLanguage
udpipe_sv = spacy_udpipe:UDPipeLanguage
udpipe_ta = spacy_udpipe:UDPipeLanguage
udpipe_te = spacy_udpipe:UDPipeLanguage
udpipe_tr = spacy_udpipe:UDPipeLanguage
udpipe_ug = spacy_udpipe:UDPipeLanguage
udpipe_uk = spacy_udpipe:UDPipeLanguage
udpipe_ur = spacy_udpipe:UDPipeLanguage
udpipe_vi = spacy_udpipe:UDPipeLanguage
udpipe_wo = spacy_udpipe:UDPipeLanguage
udpipe_zh = spacy_udpipe:UDPipeLanguage

